# Computing statistics for chunked arrays

Using the chunked storage layout enables iterating over arrays irrespective their size. This enables us to perform incremental computations of the summary statistics for each HDF5 array. While this is excellent for reducing the resident memory consumption on the host compared to a naive loading of the entire array in memory, a clear disadvantage is that calls to e.g. `np.mean` on the entire array with a contiguous layout are not possible anymore. Instead, incremental computations are required. These can face numerical imprecisions if not even catastrophic cancellation issues though.

With [Welford's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithms_for_calculating_variance) we implemented a stable and accurate alternative. However, as a sequential algorithm the Welford code is not effectively vectorizable. Consequently, it would force the code to run at least an order of magnitude less efficient compared to making `np.mean` calls that are vectorized. To avoid this performance penalty, the current default in the NOMAD parser of `pynxtools` is that the mean value of an HDF5 array is computed using the naive accumulation with a double precision accumulator.

We advise all users of the `pynxtools` NOMAD parser that this may still though cause a loss in precision for the reported mean value especially when individual values of the array differ by many orders of magnitude. We find this compromise acceptable though given that the main incentive for representing HDF5 arrays in NOMAD Metainfo via summary statistics at all is to provide for sufficient content to narrow datasets in NOMAD searches.
